# DIGESTION, TRANSPORT AND EXCHANGE, EXCRETION AND OSMOREGULATION, REPRODUCTION IN ECHINODERMS AND CHORDATES 

## PART I. PHYLUM ECHINODERMATA

A “spiny skin” characterizes members of the phylum Echinodermata, by only living in marine environments, and by possessing a unique **water vascular system**. They are also radially symmetrical as adults, but not as larvae. The spiny skin is actually an **endoskeleton** made up of calcareous plates. Typical echinoderms include seastars (starfish), brittle stars, sea urchins, sand dollars, sea cucumbers and sea lilies. According to DNA evidence, they are closely related to members of the Phylum Chordata, the phylum to which humans belong. Chordates and echinoderms also share a similar pattern of embryonic development, as both are deuterostomes. 

**EXTERNAL FEATURES OF THE SEASTAR** 

*Pisaster* can be seen in the crevices of intertidal rocks and covering the pilings of piers and docks. *Pisaster* is a rapacious predator on bivalves, but little eats it, except for the occasional desperate seagull. 

The underside of the seastar is referred to as the **oral** side; the opposite side is the **aboral** side. The external features on the aboral side include the **rays** (arms) and **sieve** **plate (madreporite).** On the surface there are small calcareous bumps called **spines** and between them are structures called **dermal papillae** (not visible with the naked eye). On the mouth side **tube feet**, the **mouth** and **ambulacral groove** can be observed**.**

The sea star uses its water vascular system to capture food and in locomotion and respiration. Water enters the system via the **sieve plate**. The water is then moved along through a series of canals by the action of cilia out to the rays and to the **ampullae**. Contraction of an ampulla forces water into a tube foot lengthening it. Contraction of longitudinal muscles in the foot forces water back into the ampulla shortening the foot. Small suction discs at the end of the feet allow the starfish to move on hard ground and to grasp its prey. The tube feet are also important sites of gas exchange. Pressure generated by the water vascular system also allows the seastar to evert its cardiac stomach and pry open the shells of bivalves like clams, in order to eat them. It is important to realize that the water vascular system is not a true a vascular system supplied with a heart as a pump, and that there is no blood that contains special pigments for transporting gases (as is seen in other animals with true vascular systems).

**Video of tube feet in action** 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p0VM67cQUWw&feature=related

### A. DIGESTION

Seastars feed by everting part of the **cardiac stomach** through their mouths out into the water (or even directly into the shells of molluscs). Then the food is either brought back into the body of the seastar for digestion or digested in place outside the seastar’s body. This allows it to feed on animals much larger than itself. Without being able to evert one of its stomachs, the hard endoskeleton would limit the size of prey that could be eaten by the seastar. The cardiac stomach passes the food to the **pyloric stomach**, where more digestion takes place. Most of the space in the ray is taken up by two highly branched **digestive glands** (also called **pyloric ceaca**). They secrete digestive juices from their many lobes. They are connected to the pyloric stomach by a pyloric duct in each ray. Absorption of nutrients occurs in the digestive glands. 

**DEMONSTRATION – DISSECTION OF A SEASTAR**

1. Look at the structure at Pin A and the matching photo on the dissecting sheet. What feature of this structure suggests that it is involved in transporting molecules across their surfaces (either through absorption or secretion)? 


2. Name the structure at Pin B. What does it have to do with digestion? 


***Video of a Seastar feeding*** *http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A100m5EpfFI&noredirect=1*

### B. TRANSPORT AND EXCHANGE

Gas exchange occurs through two types of structures that extend from the surface of the seastar: the **tube feet** and the **papillae** (also called **papulae** or **gills**); the latter are thin-walled extensions of the **body cavity** (**coelom**) that extend onto the aboral surface of the seastar. They look like small finger-like sacs when the animal is in the water, but may not be visible on these specimens. There is no circulatory system in the seastar. Instead, gases are carried around the body via fluids in the body cavity, powered by the action of cilia.

1. Given the location and function of the papillae, what is a likely purpose of the spines? 

2. Why would the papillae be difficult to see on these specimens? 



3. Name the structures at Pin C and list two different functions of these structures.  




In one ray the digestive glands have been removed to show the **ampullae** of the tube feet, which are the bulbs on the aboral side of the tube feet, which contract to extend the tube feet. 

4. Are the **tube feet** in a contracted or extended state? Why? 



### C. EXCRETION AND OSMOREGULATION

In seastars, nitrogenous waste is excreted as ammonia. Solid waste is expelled through the anus. There is no osmoregulation in seastars. They are osmoconformers.


### D. REPRODUCTION

Sometimes individual animals are male or female (**dioecious**). In other cases, the same gonad can produce both eggs and sperm, either simultaneously or sequentially. External fertilization occurs after the gametes have been released through ducts located on the central body between the arms.

Examine the ray that has the digestive glands removed and answer the question below. 

1. What is the structure at Pin D.? What is its function? 



## PART II. PHYLUM CHORDATA

Phylum Chordata includes all those animals (perhaps 50,000 species) with backbones: fish, amphibians, mammals, reptiles, birds, as well as a few other species. A few chordates do not have backbones and are thus classified as invertebrates. These include small marine animals called tunicates and lancelets. To be a chordate an animal must: 

* Have had at least during embryonic development, a structure called a **notochord**. (this is a flexible supportive rod running longitudinally through the dorsum of the animal just ventral to the nerve cord; it becomes the spinal column in vertebrates); 
* have pharyngeal gill slits at some stage in their development;
* have a dorsal hollow nerve cord, and
* Have a post-anal tail.


**THE PERCH** 

The perch is a chordate belonging to the Actinopterygii (ray-finned fishes) within the subphylum Vertebrata. Well over 25,000 ray-finned fish species are known today and, as we probe deep ocean regions, we will find many more. Perch are freshwater food and game fish found in Europe and North America. *Perca fluviatilis* or yellow perch is a marginal sport fish, which has been introduced into Vaseux and Osoyoos Lakes in the Okanagan. 

Work in pairs and make sure you have all of the following materials for you and your partner before dissecting the perch:

* 1 surgical scalpel
* Surgical gloves
* 1 dissecting tray
* 1 teasing needle
* 1 pair of dissecting scissors
* 1 pair of forceps
* Dissecting pins (put them into a Petri plate)
* Diagram of the perch dissection
* Dissecting microscope (Take to your bench)

Obtain a perch from the fume hood and place it in your tray. Before removing the perch from the fume hood, spray water on it to dilute the formaldehyde odor. **Please use your surgical gloves.**

**THE PERCH – EXTERNAL FEATURES**

Be sure that you can identify the dorsal and ventral sides of your specimen and its anterior and posterior ends. Be able to draw and identify the pectoral, dorsal, pelvic, anal, and caudal fins.  

**DISSECTION OF THE PERCH**

> Again, ask students to note down deviations from protocol to ensure #Potential/Research_transparency 

Use the forceps to remove a few scales from the dorsal side of your fish. By examining the scales of wild fish in temperate ecosystems, they can be aged. Fish regularly lay down rings of material in their scales. During periods when there is a lot of food and the fish are growing quickly, the rings are further apart; when food is less available and temperatures are lower, the rings will be closer together. Mount several scales in water on a microscope slide and look at them under the compound microscope. 

1. Draw a diagram of the rings that make up the scales. **(  /1)**

> Would be good to include all drawings in an #Potential/Open_notebooks and refer to #Potential/Biology_data_presentation_guidelines if we include how to do a proper journal style drawing in the guidelines. Also helps them with formatting their figure caption appropriately.

Most fish have external fertilization, but a few species, like guppies, have internal fertilization and are livebearers.

Locate the anus. Try to determine the sex of your perch by looking for pores behind the anus. If there is only one, it is the urogenital pore and your fish is male. If there are two pores, the anterior one is the genital pore and the posterior one is the urinary pore; your fish is female. 

2. Which sex is your fish? **(  /1)**


### THE PERCH – INTENAL ANATOMY

To expose the internal organs, hold the fish with the ventral side up and the head pointing away from you. Insert the point of your scissors through the body wall in front of the anus and cut up the midline of the body to the space between the opercula. Now lay the fish on its right side in the dissecting pan, and remove the skin and the muscles of its left side. To do that, continue to cut up around the back edge of the gill chamber to the top of the body cavity. Make another incision from the starting point of the ventral incision close to the anus, and cut upward to the top of the body cavity. Be careful not to disturb the internal organs, especially the swim bladder, which is a clear sac. Remove the lateral body wall by cutting along the top of the body cavity. 

3. Were you right in your assessment of the sex of your animal? Now that you can see the internal anatomy, compare your animal with the dissecting guide.

Which type of gonad is in your fish? **(  /1)**

#### A. FEEDING AND DIGESTION

Perch are carnivores. Their digestive tract comprises an **alimentary canal** (the tube running from the mouth to the anus) as well as **accessory structures**, such as the **liver**, **salivary glands** and **pancreas**. After the mouth, the alimentary canal includes, in order, the **esophagus**, **stomach**, **pyloric caeca** (secretory and digestive functions), **intestine** and **duodenum**.

1. Show the following structures to your instructor: liver, intestine, anus. **(  /3)**

2. Estimate the length of the duodenum plus intestine relative to the overall body length of the perch (not including the caudal fin). If you found a fish with a much longer length of intestine relative to its body length, what type of food would you expect that species to eat? **(  /1)**



#### B. CIRCULATION AND RESPIRATION

Perch, being aquatic chordates, use gills as a respiratory exchange surface. Cut away the bony **operculum** to expose the gill chamber and its four **gills**. Remove an individual gill to study its structure. The hard bony support is the **gill arch**, with posteriorly directed **gill filaments**. The hard anterior finger-like projections, the **gill rakers**, prevent coarse material or food from passing through the **gill slits**. Gill filaments are supplied with capillary beds across which gas exchange occurs. The flow of blood is opposite to the flow of water across the gills, called **counter-current flow**; this enhances the concentration gradient and thus the rate of diffusion. This helps metabolically active fish to more efficiently extract oxygen from relatively poorly (relative to air) oxygenated water. 


1. Draw the gill structures mentioned above.  **(  /3)**

> Would be good to include all drawings in an #Potential/Open_notebooks and refer to #Potential/Biology_data_presentation_guidelines if we include how to do a proper journal style drawing in the guidelines. Also helps them with formatting their figure caption appropriately.


Chordates have closed circulatory systems. The advantage of a closed circulatory system over an open system is that blood can be kept at a higher pressure thus moving through the body more quickly, which is more efficient at servicing body tissues.

The **pericardial cavity**, just beneath and ventral to the gills, contains the **two-chambered heart**. Observe the thin-walled posterior **atrium** extending over the thicker-walled **ventricle**. Anterior to the ventricle is the **bulbus arteriosus**, the enlarged base of the ventral aorta that carries blood to the gills and on to the rest of the body. The blood is under pressure when it reaches the gills, but pressure is reduced when the blood passes through the capillary bed. Blood pressure remains low as the blood travels to the rest of the body. This is different from animals with a pulmonary loop, in which the blood travels back from the lungs to the heart, where it is pumped (re-pressurized) to the rest of the body and thus can move more quickly and service body tissues more efficiently than the lower pressure system.

2. After the blood leaves the heart, it passes through at least two capillary beds: one in the gills and one somewhere else in the fish’s body. Which of these will receive blood of higher pressure: the gills or the body?  **(  /1)**




#### C. EXCRETION AND OSMOREGULATION

Chordates have kidneys composed of **nephrons**. In fish and amphibians the kidneys lie as two straps alongside the spinal column; in reptiles they become attenuated to the posterior portion of the animal, and this phenomenon is even more advance in birds and mammals. Kidneys function as both excretory and osmoregulatory organs. In addition, osmoregulation can be facilitated by other organs, depending upon the type of animal.

In freshwater fish like the perch, the kidney excretes large amounts of dilute urine in order to rid the body of excess water. In marine fish, the kidney excretes salt ions in very concentrated urine. In all fish, ammonium is the form of nitrogenous waste excreted.

1. Name two places where ammonia/ammonium is excreted in fish? **(  /2)**






### THE RAT:

Rats are examples of terrestrial chordates. They are also mammals. Therefore their anatomy will reflect the fact that they get their oxygen from air, must conserve water, and have internal fertilization with their offspring then developing in a uterus before being born.

#### A. DIGESTION

As in all tetrapods, the anterior end of the digestive and respiratory systems is shared. Air, water and food all pass through the oral cavity. In the **pharynx**, the **epiglottis** acts as a gate to direct air into the lungs and food or water into the rest of alimentary canal. Like in the perch, the digestive system comprises the **alimentary canal** (**oral cavity**, **pharynx**, **esophagus**, **stomach**, **small intestine**, **large intestine**, **rectum** and **anus)**. Each part of the alimentary canal is specialized for a particular function: mechanical or chemical digestion, absorption of water or nutrients, or retention or elimination of undigested solid wastes. Be able to identify the **stomach, small intestine, salivary glands, liver, and spleen** in preparation for your lab exam.

The accessory structures of the digestive tract include the **liver, pancreas** and **salivary glands**. These are exocrine glands, meaning that they secrete chemicals into ducts that lead directly to another structure - in this case, the alimentary canal. Specifically, the accessory structures supply enzymes, or other chemicals that aid in digestion, to the alimentary canal.

1. Identify the structure at Pin A on the rat demonstration. Is it part of the alimentary canal or is it an accessory structure? **(  /2)**



2. Name structure indicated at Pin B on the rat demonstration. What is the function of this structure? **(  /2)**


3. Is the ratio of intestinal length to body length higher or lower in the rat than in the perch? Why is this? **(  /2)**




#### B. CIRCULATION AND REGULATION

After being directed from the **pharynx** into the respiratory system, air enters the **trachea**, the **bronchi** and then the **lungs**. The lungs of amphibians are fairly simple invaginated sacs of vascularized epithelial tissue in which there are internal partitions to increase the surface area. Birds and mammals, however, have lungs of a more complex nature. In mammals, the **bronchioles** divide into finer and finer branches until they end in tiny, blind-ended sacs called **alveoli**, which greatly increase the surface area across which gas exchange occurs. Birds have other mechanisms to increase gas exchange.

**Look at the prepared slide of a section of a lung** and make sure that you can identify an alveolus and its adjacent capillaries.

Because air movement into and out of the lungs is based on differences in air pressure, it is important that the lungs be sealed in an air-tight part of the body where movement of muscles can create differences in pressure. This area is called the **thoracic cavity**. Differences in pressure within the thoracic cavity are created by movement of muscles associated with the ribs, as well as the diaphragm.

1. Name the structure indicated at Pin C on the rat dissection. Look in your textbook to determine the role of this structure in respiration. What is it? **(  /2)**





The heart of the rat, like all mammals, consists of four chambers: two **atria** and two **ventricles**. When the atria contract they fill their respective ventricle with blood; when the ventricles contract, the increased pressure directs blood from the right ventricle to the lungs and from the left ventricle to the rest of the body. Your rat has been double-injected with latex. Blue latex was injected into the **veins** and red latex was injected into the **arteries**. Entering the right atrium are three main blood vessels that bring the deoxygenated blood back to the heart from all regions of the body. These blood vessels are the **right superior vena cava**, the **left superior vena cava** and the **inferior vena cava**. The right and left superior venae cavae return deoxygenated blood to the heart from the right and left side of the head, neck and forelimbs. The inferior vena cava returns deoxygenated blood to the heart from the lower part of the body. More in depth detail of a mammal heart will be covered in the next lab.

2. Name the structure indicated at Pin D on the rat dissection. **(  /1)**


#### C. EXCRETION AND OSMOREGULATION

Rat kidneys, like those of humans, excrete urea. Urea is less toxic than ammonia therefore it requires less water to be excreted; however, energy must be expended in order to make urea from ammonia. Organisms that use urea tend to live in environments where water conservation is important. Rat kidneys lie outside of the abdominal cavity, behind the lining of connective tissue. Thus, they are said to be **retroperitoneal**. The kidneys are the major osmoregulatory organ in the rat.

1. Name the structure indicated at Pin E on the rat dissection. **(  /1)**


#### D. REPRODUCTION

In male rats, the **scrotum**, a large sac of skin, muscle and connective tissue holds the **testes** on the exterior of the body just ventral to the anus. During non-breeding periods, the testes may be retracted into the abdominal cavity and the scrotum will not be enlarged. Around the outside of each testis is a C-shaped structure known as the **epididymis**, which is a very long, highly coiled tubule. Part of the epididymis is on the posterior end of the testes and part is on the anterior end. Sperm cells produced in the **seminiferous tubules** of the testes pass into the epididymis and then into the **vas deferens**, which is a moderately large tube leading from the epididymis to the **urethra**, which is a tube located inside the **penis**. The penis is enclosed in an epithelial sheath and held along the ventral wall of the abdomen. 

The **prostate glands** are found on either side of the urinary bladder. These glands, and some other glands in this region, comprise the accessory sex glands. The secretions of these glands form the **seminal fluid**, which carries the sperm during ejaculation, activates and provides certain nutrients for them, and contains substances that neutralize the somewhat acid environment in the vagina.  

1. Why would the testes be held outside the body in the scrotum during reproductive periods? **(  /1)**



2. Name the structure indicated at Pin F on the rat dissection. Where does the sperm travel to after passing through this structure? **(  /2)**

In female rats, as in all mammals, the eggs are produced in the ovaries and then released into the oviducts, through which they travel to the uterus. If fertilization occurs, the fetuses develop in the uterus. The rat uterus has two horns, which join at their base to form the vagina.

3. Are fetuses present in the female rat specimen (i.e., bulges in the uterus?) **(  /1)**


## GROUP ASSIGNMENT

**Group Assignment – Presentations**


1. Divide yourselves into 3 groups per table (2-3 per group)
2. Assign your groups a sea star (group 1), a perch (group 2) or a rat (group 3). You should have one of each organism per table. Keep the specimens moist by covering the animal with wet paper towels, adding a small amount of water to the tray and storing the specimens in the fridge in the prep room.
3. Working together you will label and prepare to present your specimen to the other two groups at your table. The presentations should include identifying and describing the function of the structure within the four sections found within each Phyla; A – Digestion, B – Transport and Exchange, C – Excretion and Osmoregulation and D – Reproduction. This should take approximately 15 minutes. You will need to intentionally label a structure incorrectly to see if the other groups will catch it. **(  /5)**
4. Each group will then present their organism to the other two groups at the table. Each presentation should take anywhere from 2-5 minutes. **(  /4)**
5. Following the presentation each group (excluding the presenting group) must add something to the presentation/dissection that was not mentioned by the presenting group or identify potential errors. **( /1)**
6. Once complete the next group will present and the process begins again.